the claim that people are Universal
explainers is a new one and it's hard
for people to get their head around but
what it means is that people can explain
any physical phenomena that's out there
that's what our minds can do
it's built upon the universality of
computation
which is a deep Theory a deep
explanation a deep fact about what the
laws of physics are and what they say
about matter
the universality of computation says
that anything that happens out there in
physical reality isn't self-computable
it just follows laws of physics because
the laws of physics are themselves
computable and so therefore whatever the
thing is whatever motion of the
particles out there that can be
represented in a computer there can be a
one-to-one correspondence between
specifically speaking the Motions of
what's going on in the quantum computer
and the Motions of any physical thing
out there in reality
in truth you don't need a quantum
computer you can just have a classical
computer but the quantum computer makes
things more efficient if you like
now the human brain runs on a universal
computer that Universal computer being
the brain of the human being the Mind
runs on the brain okay the mind also has
this capacity to explain stuff and
explaining is a certain kind of
computation how can that be so because
anything the brain does as a certain
kind of computation because the motion
of particles is a kind of computation
where you have initial conditions the
laws of physics and then final
conditions that represents input
processing and output when it comes to
computation that's what the brain is
doing the mind is doing a special
special kind of computation which we
call comprehending understanding or
explaining I regard these things as kind
of synonyms
so that's humans a certain kind of
person anything that's out there can be
comprehended or understood by us
explained by us whatever the physical
phenomena is it can be on the other side
of the universe the go-to example is the
Quasar a system so completely unlike the
physics of the human mind that you
couldn't think of two structures more
different the wet wear of the brain and
a black hole are creating material such
that huge lobes of energy are shooting
out gas and radiation in particular
directions that outshine entire galaxies
this is a quasar and yet the human mind
can have inside of it a model of what's
going on in that Quasar on the other
side of the universe it's an astonishing
fact about reality that this can happen
what's this got to do with the fact that
we can understand anything who really
tries to understand quasars
astrophysicists
why why was I a person who was born
in such a way that I was interested in
astrophysics not everyone is well I
don't think I was born that way I think
I had a certain experiences early on in
my life
that just caused me to tend in the
direction of
astronomy and astrophysics I had a
father who was interested in fostering
that interest in me I'd go outside at
night and look up in the sky and wonder
what those things called stars were I
had telescopes bought for me and books
bought for me and I was just sort of
pushed in that direction not pushed I
fell in that direction I I was drawn in
that direction pulled if you like
other people are pulled in the direction
of pure mathematics or engineering
others toward cosmetics and dancing
others towards Sports others towards
mechanics
others towards family and psychology and
thinking about their internal subjective
States and what meditation is and and so
the list goes and iterate for every
single interest a human being can have
now I can't dance I'm hopeless I can't
play an instrument terrible I'm really
bad at languages
do I think I'm incapable literally in
capable of doing those things no I think
I could if I really tried I'd like to
learn Korean but as I keep on saying to
people I'm just terrible at it I try but
this is the whole problem why am I
trying
lots of people have converged on this
idea that if you're actually trying
that's the sign of a problem
a problem with the way you're even
approaching this stuff called learning
my poor facility in picking up languages
in particular career
my my hopeless English accent my
inability to retain vocabulary and the
rules of grammar
and just understanding that language or
any other language that I'd like to
learn
that's not a refutation of my ability to
understand anything in principle it's
not
it just means I'm not interested enough
and you might come back with oh but I'm
really interested in trying to learn the
highest levels of mathematics and I
can't I've tried so hard and I can't do
it I really want to be good at calculus
I can't people always raise mathematics
as if it's the thing that proves uh it's
the exception that proves the rule isn't
true it's the exception that falsifies
this theory about anyone can learn
anything otherwise hold it up
mathematics pure mathematics or
theoretical physics something like that
that's the hard thing you know what's
hard because the overall majority of
people find it really boring in the same
way that the overall majority of people
find playing the cello boring
everyone majority of people find
gymnastics boring the other one majority
of people find it everything boring
because they're only interested in the
things they really find interesting
because there's so much out there in the
world to learn to know to understand to
find fun that you can only possibly pick
a tiny sliver of those things I
mentioned in that chip there gymnastics
that's a different thing because we are
confined to bodies human bodies and
that's genetic
if we all had our minds put into the
exactly the same bodies into some
cybernetic robot of the future then we'd
all be able to learn gymnastics to the
same facility but we wouldn't we
wouldn't even with our robotic bodies
we'd still choose to do different things
even if we all had a body which was
connected up to
Wolfram Alpha which we kind of already
do
or bodies connected up to pocket
calculators which we can't already do
very few of us would be interested in
solving integrals or differentiating
complex functions
or multiplying to get the large numbers
why because it's boring for most of us
we're not we don't have that problem if
we had that problem then we'd try and do
that thing
and prove to everyone that we could do
that thing but it's not something we go
around routinely wanting to refute
just to prove someone wrong on the
internet that in fact we can learn
anything if we apply ourselves if we
really tried
most of us don't want to try you know
what here's the other Counter Culture
thing we shouldn't be trying because if
you're trying that's telling you
something about your own psychology that
you're not really interested in this
thing
you can either try to find an interest
in that thing and fail or try and find
an interest in that thing and eventually
you do which is what I'm hoping to do
for example with Korean I'm hoping
eventually I'm going to find the thing
that makes it really interesting my
partner does just finds language is
interesting I'm trying to find that
myself I know it's there if I persevere
but you know I have so many interests my
time has just taken up with actually
reading science and reading philosophy
and making podcasts and doing all this
stuff that I just don't have time and so
that explains to me well I'm not
actually good at languages because it'd
be another thing the cognitive load
which is a consequence of the finite
time in a day it makes it impossible for
me to learn all of these things but I
could in principle if I put the other
things off then yeah of course I could
so you can't tell me but
the ability to do theoretical physics at
the highest level
is a refutation of
cognitive universality of the human mind
because some of us can't do it
it's not some of us can't do it in
principle some of us can't do string
theory in principle it's that we don't
want to we seriously don't want to
anymore I'd love to be a stranger as
everyone sits back and goes and dreams
and things I'd love to be the smartest
person in the world what do you mean by
smartest person in the world
what you mean is adhering to this
strange cultural phenomena that we have
where we for whatever reason have
decided that the strength here is to the
smartest people in the world because the
physicists are the smartest people in
the world because that's what we've been
told going back years now and it
probably it comes from it stretches all
the way back to the Greeks when they
were the ones doing the first science as
natural philosophers and so on
this is regarded as being the measure of
man the capacity to do these particular
things
but in truth the measure of man what it
means to be a human what Humanity
entails is universal explanation being
able to turn your perfectly elastic mind
to anything at all but you won't turn it
to anything you'll turn it to something
you can't turn it to everything because
that's impossible so you pick particular
things and then you make value judgments
about what you've chosen and what
everyone else is
to presume that
something else is needed in order to
explain why a person
chooses not to learn high level physics
something other than they're just not
interested
could mean that
processing speed isn't fast enough in
their brain okay so they could use a
pocket cathode or a computer to augment
that or they don't have enough memory
okay so in that case you can develop
your memory your short-term memory by
the way you see people remember long
lists of you know random things like a
shuffle deck of cards you show them at
once and then they can immediately
recite it back these are learnable
things you look these up these
magnificent capacities that certain
people demonstrate of having amazing
memories remembering pies to a thousand
decimal places and what they will say
all of them to a person is they're not
doing anything amazing Supernatural with
anyone else can it's just a skill you
can train yourself to do but most of us
aren't interested again it comes down to
that interest you get bored how can you
stop yourself being bored I don't know
you have to find the fun somehow but you
know what's fun yourself there are
certain things you find fun there's
certain things you find boring but
remembering pi to a thousand or ten
thousand decimal places not something
most of us find fun
but does that mean you're stupid because
you can't do it or something you can't
do it again you only can't do it because
you're not interested in doing it but
because you're literally incapable of
doing this thing that someone else I
would say has a wasted time doing after
all that's something you can look
saying that
you can't do a particular thing when in
principle humans can learn anything
means that there's something there's an
exception to be placed on you or some
other person
that only these particular people can
learn these maths or music to this
proficiency or name your skill and we'd
have these exceptions to the rule rather
than it being about interest it would
have to come down to genetic capacity of
the mind which for human beings is
universal
and we see that because you just look at
humans we're using our minds for all
different things but if you think that
it's a genetic capacity then all of our
DNA has to be encoded for well this
person's got the DNA for music and this
one's got it for mats and this one's got
it for sport and this one's got it for
poetry and repeat for everything else
but genetic diversity just isn't like
that it doesn't encode explanatory
knowledge of that kind instead what it
encodes is a general capacity to explain
a general capacity to learn and that
explains why there's such diversity that
explains the remarkable ways in which
people decide to direct their minds to
all these different things that explains
that's the parsimonious explanation
we've all got basically similar minds
that we start out with not tabula rasa
it's not a blank slate okay we do have
genetic propensities but those give us
ideas
and we can always change our ideas even
the ones that are genetic that we say
this often you know if there's anything
genetic that's been programmed into us
as human beings well it's the genetic
propensity to survive and to eat for
people routinely go on diets and some
people unfortunately commit suicide so
it's clearly the case that our
explanatory Minds can easily override
our genetic propensity or even instinct
to do a certain
to say otherwise as we say is an appeal
to the supernatural someone's just asked
me on Twitter why is supernaturalism
irrational because it purports
to explain things by recourse to saying
they define the laws of physics the laws
of physics say
that there's a universality of
computation
that there are computers in the world
that can be built that are approximately
Universal the only thing that prevents
them from me actually Universal is you'd
need infinite memory okay so
asymptotically you can approach the
universality of computer fact is you can
build these things called Universal
computers in the world
and they can simulate
with one-to-one correspondence in their
internal working the
behavior of any matter out there in the
world a one-to-one correspondence
between the internal workings of the
motion of the particles in the computer
with the motion of the particles out
there in physical reality one can
represent the other
to say that this isn't possible
is an appeal to the supernatural because
that's the law of physics it's exactly
like saying well I just believe
that you can travel faster than the
speed of light I just believe that you
can defy conservation of energy I just
believe that the second law of
Thermodynamics can be violated like how
you can believe all those things but
that's just like saying I believe in God
I believe in magic okay fine but we've
now left the realm of having a
discussion based around reason and
Science and if we're going to have
discussions like this if we at least
stick to the facts otherwise we can all
sit back and say well I don't accept
science as it is or physics as it is or
Reason as it is I'm going to appeal to
the supernatural okay fine you go off
into your corner and I'll stay over here
where we can actually solve problems
because once you do appeal to the
supernatural you've given up on problem
solving
it's an explanation that explains
nothing
it just says here reason doesn't apply
here science doesn't apply here Anything
Goes and I'm not willing to say that I
want to understand stuff and as soon as
you say well the supernatural obtains
there
then you're saying there's a thing there
that I can't understand by definition
it's a supernatural thing where you know
people immediately say well God created
the universe oh who created God God
didn't create anything how do you know
that well we can't understand God you
can't apply reason and science to God
God's Beyond us pathetic humans
understand okay
so we've given up on understanding I'm
not willing to do that I want to
continue to always understand stuff and
one of the best understandings we have
is of what people are the universal
explainers and a logical consequence of
that is any one of us is also a
universal explainer and Canon principle
learn anything that can be learned
including anything that anyone else will
learn but we won't in practice because
in practice we have a finite life and
finite number of interests even though
in principle we could
QED